History 374, Semester Project, interview by
Steve Brown. Oh, interviewee is Sam Gideon,
former general manager of the Lower Colorado
River Authority, to be referred to as LCRA.
Question number one. Who was most responsible for
getting the LCRA started? Well, it'd be pretty
difficult to say who was most responsible because
it was a culmination of efforts that had been going
on for, oh, I guess 20 or 30 years, trying to create
something that could be used in order to build dams
above Austin that would control the floods that
were devastating the river below Austin around
Columbus and Eagle Lake and Wharton. And the
people down there had organized and tried to do
something for many, many years, but I would guess
that the one most responsible would be a man by the
name of A.J. Wertz, W-I-R-T-Z, who was a lawyer
here in Austin, had been Undersecretary of the
Interior under Ickes, but had been interested in
water development in Texas for many, many years.
Okay. How much of an impact was the Tennessee
Valley Authority on the formation of the LCRA?
Well, the Tennessee Valley Authority had no
impact other than it was just an illustration of
what could be done.
the reason for the LCRA was local and not based on
anything that had happened over in Tennessee.
Okay.
Many people attribute the early economic growth
of Central Texas, that is, after the after the
Great Depression to the LCRA. Do you agree with
that? Well, I think that you would have to do that
because the LCRA brought into the area a control of
the floods that sort of would ruin the cities down
below Austin, and including Austin, where it
would ruin their water systems, their sewerage
systems, And then, in addition, the LCRA brought
into the area a plentiful supply of water, which in
Texas is something that is needed for growth. And
then the LCRA brought into the area a plentiful
supply of low-cost electric power back in the
1940s.
when electricity could be bought at a much cheaper
rate than it is now. And by virtue of having the
cheap lower rates, the
people were able to take advantage of all these
other things that I'm talking about in the way of
water and flood control. And it became a very
desirable place in which to live. There were no
private homes? private companies already
involved? There were private utilities already
in Texas. The city of Austin owned its own system,
but the private utilities were having
difficulties reaching out and going into the
rural areas because it was too costly. And what the
LCRA did was take advantage of the laws that were
being passed in the under what was called New Deal
under Roosevelt, where money was being made
available to local cities and towns and rural
areas so that they could either buy or build their
electric systems because it was the feeling of
Roosevelt that economical electricity was
necessary in order to keep people on the farms and
in order to keep the rural areas to where they could
continue to make a living and be a desirable place
in which to live. So what happened was that the
LCRA, after it got started, bought out the area in
Central Texas from the private utilities and
developed the area itself.
Obviously, there was a lot of construction And as
you say, buying of people's lands. What
relationship or contact with environmentalists
did the SRA have, or do they have now? Well, back in
1940, wasn't anybody worried about the
environment. And there wasn't any contacts with
the environmentalists as they are today. In the
first place, the people were When the authority
started in 34, the people didn't have jobs. They
had to make a living. They were in the Great
Depression, and anything that would give jobs was
looked upon with great favor. In the second place,
you didn't have all the industries and the
automobiles and the airplanes and the factories
and everything that today are state-owned.
affect the environment and therefore what was
done back in 1934 and 40 in constructing dams and
clearing the area for dams and reservoirs had no
effect on the environment and furthermore the
dams were built in the hill country above Austin
and primarily the land was covered with cedar up
there and it was a very harmful to the people, cedar
was. It caused people to have hay fever. It got on
the land and took it over and grass wouldn't grow
under it, so it was worthless. And it was good to get
it cleared off.
You said that the LCRA helped in times of flood. How
does it help in times of drought? Well, in times of
drought, what it does, it takes the waters that
have been stored during flood times, and it
releases those waters gradually as they are
needed downstream. So in drought times, they let
water out of the lakes in order to take care of needs
of municipalities like Austin and on downstream,
and then primarily to take care of the rice crop
that grows down in the area around Columbus and
Wharton and Eagle Lake and Bay City. Back before
the dams and the LCRA, they were able to raise the
rice crop about once every three years. And then
the other years, they might or might not have
enough water. After the LCRA, they were able to
plan on raising the crop every year and have been
able to do that. And the amount, the value
increased uh from the standpoint of raising crops
have been many millions of dollars every year in
addition the land has become more valuable that's
helped the local areas the local school systems
the local cities and counties and in addition it
keeps the people busy every year because they know
they're going to get a crop they know there's
enough water as an example during the draft In the
early 50s, there'd been about 10 years there when
there really wasn't very much rain in Texas. And
the LCRA nearly had to drain their lakes to keep
enough water going downstream, but they did that
and then finally it rained. So during the drought,
what they do, they let water out that they caught
during floods.
When the SRA was formed, it is a state agency. It is a
state agency created by the legislature of the
state of Texas. Well, there's obviously some
politics involved, but how much political
mingling is there? I mean, is there certain
administrators that get involved in it and try to
influence people in some way? Well, of course,
there's a lot of politics involved in anything
that's done. You've got several river
authorities in Texas. There's the Brazos River
Authority and the Trinity River Authority and
Guadalupe River Authority and the Nueces River
Authority, San Antonio River Authority, and
several others, and all of them involve politics.
The LCRA probably involved more politics because
it was being created and it's the only one at that
time that had any electric power. And so
therefore, the private utilities, electric
utilities, didn't want to see it built because
they didn't want it competing with them for
electric customers. And there was a great deal of
politics involved and trading back and forth. And
finally, it was worked out. Everybody seemed to
think probably is the best thing. And then it
brought about flood control.
product of what they were doing, too. As a state
agency, is there much influence on turning a
profit in the LCRA with its electric power? Is
there much what? Is there much incentive for
turning a profit? Oh, no, because the law that
creates the authority says that it shall not make a
profit. All that it does is make enough to pay its
expenses and to keep its facilities, equipment,
and property in good shape and make enough so that
it can continue to build for the future in order to
meet the needs of customers. But the act provides
that it shall not make a profit. And while it makes
money from the standpoint of selling electricity
and selling water, that money must be used in
paying its expenses paying off the debt that it
borrows to build the dams and and the power plants
and the transmission line and to build for the
future so that the people that are relying on the
lcra will not all of a sudden find out that they
don't have any body to supply them with power and
water
uh what is the relationship between the federal
government and the LCRA. Well, the federal
government, there is no relationship from the
standpoint of politics. The LCRA was created by
the state legislature. The members of the
governing board, it's run by a board of directors.
They are all appointed by the governor of Texas.
They have to be approved by the state senate. And
the federal government has nothing to do with
that. When the LCRA was started, there wasn't any
place you could borrow any money, except from the
federal government, because the banks wouldn't
loan you any money. And the private people didn't
have any money to buy bonds to help construct dams
and things like that. So the only place you could go
to borrow money was to the federal government. And
that's what the cities were doing. The municipal
buildings were being built by federal money. The
federal agencies were created, Public Works
Administration and the Reconstruction Finance
Corporation created in Washington the loan money
so that it would put people back to work. And so the
LCRA went to the federal government to borrow
their first money. The legislature that created
the authority gave the LCRA $15,000. and to get
started on, and said that had to be paid back out of
the first month, and said that it could not levy a
tax. So the only way it can borrow any money is to
agree to pay it out of the revenues that it made. So
the authority went to the federal government and
borrowed the money to get started. And that's
where the, and in order to build rural lines and
help the rural electric cooperatives, The LCRA
later borrowed money from the federal
government. But the only relation was that in the
borrowing of money, the federal government had no
regulations, no right to say anything to the
authority about how it was run, what it did, or
anything else. And in 1942, the LCRA paid back the
government the money that it had borrowed and went
into the open market in New York City and borrowed
money on the bond market because by then it had
gotten to where it could borrow money publicly and
the recession was getting over and the war was on
and there was money available to be loaned to build
electric plants and dams and transmission lines
and things like that. In
1958, the then Senator Lyndon Johnson said, Of all
endeavors on which I have worked in public life, I
am proudest of the accomplishments in developing
the lower Colorado River. How much influence did
Johnson have in the LCR? Well, Johnson, from the
standpoint of having influence, what he did was
help the authority in Washington when they needed
help to get started. because he, the congressman
in Texas, at the time the LCRA got started, Texas
had some very powerful congressmen. They had Sam
Rayburn, who later became Speaker of the House,
and then in the LCRA district, Buck Hannon was from
Brenham, that's in the district, and he was
chairman of the Finance Commit, Appropriations
Committee, and then The man from Columbus was
chairman of the Committee on Building Dams. And so
they were very helpful in getting the money needed
by OCRA to get started, getting loans made to them.
And then after they died, Johnson was elected
congressman from this area. And he was very
helpful in getting the money loan to LCRA so that it
could build these dams and build the rural lines
because when he became congressman while very few
people out in his district had electric power out
on farms or ranches and by the time he got through
and got elected to the Senate practically every
farm in his area that wanted power had electric
power. So what he did was to help in Washington get a
LCRA where it could borrow the money, which it paid
back in full with interest. But he got it when they
couldn't borrow money anywhere else because
money wasn't available.
Getting off the subject of the LCRA, since we
mentioned Johnson, you were a personal friend of
his. What kind of a man was he? What do you think? I
mean, that's a broad question. Well, that's a
broad question in a way. The only answer I have is
that, yes, I knew him from, I lived right across the
street from him when long before he got, I mean,
before he got elected to Congress and knew him
while he was a congressman and worked with him on,
he helped us with the LCRA and And as far as I was
concerned, he was always my friend, very nice. His
family was nice. We'd go to Washington. He'd
invite us out to his home. When he was president, he
invited my son, myself, down to the White House and
had them show us the White House. And I never did
have too much other business dealings with him. So
I wasn't around him in a political way because I
never did run for office and never did get involved
in races other than donating money and time and
driving my car and blowing the horn when they made
speeches back in those days. All the candidates
had to go out to the various country fairs and all
their friends went along, you know, and blew their
horns when they made speeches trying to make
noise. But I didn't really get involved with him,
politically speaking, so he was a very a nice
friend to me, and his family has always been nice
and friendly. He never did ask me to do anything.
When I was manager of OCRA, he would recommend
people, but if we didn't hire him, that was all
right, too. So actually, I cannot pass too much on
his type of man he was, from a political standpoint
because I wasn't associated with him politically
and I wasn't associated with his financing part.
So I really don't know that much. It's just as a
neighbor that I knew him and he was always
neighborly and friendly and would help if you
needed a little help. That's about all I know.
Okay, getting back to the LCRA,
It is a major electric power producer in the Hill
Country area. Has it ever looked into or thought
about other forms of energy, as nuclear energy or
solar energy or something? Oh, yes. In fact,
they're in other energy. In 1964, they built their
first coal plant because There's not enough water
on the Colorado River to generate enough
electricity to take care of the need. So they built
a coal plant and then they built another coal plant
down here in Fayette County near LaGrange and
they're talking and planning now to build a
lignite plant. They have looked at nuclear energy
and of course Solar energy is something nice to
talk about, but it's just not practical as yet and
probably won't be for another 20 or 30 years. And
you can't sit and wait 20 or 30 years because people
want their electricity when they want the lights
to burn and the television to run. They don't want
it 20 years from now. So yes, they've looked at
other things. And as I say, there's not enough
water to generate any more power, water power. So
they've turned to coal, and they have two coal
plants now, and they're getting ready to build a
big lignite plant. What exactly are we talking
about in terms of amount of electricity being
served to people and water available to the
people? Some broad amount. How much are we talking
about? Well, I don't know. and exactly how to
measure it from the standpoint of electricity,
but they sell electricity to about 30 towns in
central Texas, all the way from Brenham and
Smithville and Bastrop up to San Samba,
Kerrville, San Marcos, Georgetown,
Hattiesville, and towns like that, Luling. Then
they serve 10 electric cooperatives that serve
about, I guess those cooperatives serve about,
oh, several hundred thousand people on farms and
ranches. And then the towns they serve, I'm sure,
half a million people. So you're talking about
lots of power and enough to serve, Well, you're not
talking about, say, as much power it would take to
serve the city of Houston, but you're talking
about enough power that would serve, say, the city
of Brown, which owns its own electric system, and I
think serves College Station. The LCRA probably
has about 20 times as much power as they do, and
that's just a real rough guess. It may be much more
than that. Okay, you joined the LCRA in 1940? Yes,
but I was working for Mr. Wertz in 1934 when the LCRA
Act was written, and I was sort of carrying the
books and things like that while he was general
counsel from 34 to 40. Then when he went to
Washington as undersecretary of the interior in
1940, I became general counsel, and then Stayed
that way until 48, and then I became assistant
general manager. And then in 1956, I became
general manager and stayed there until I retired
in 1973. So actually, I worked for the LCRA more or
less full time from 1940 to 1973. And you are
somewhat still involved with them? No, not now. I
don't do anything. I'm retired. in 19 when i went
with them in 1948 they didn't have a retirement
system and i felt like in order to get good
employees you had to have one so i set up a
retirement system and since it was the first one in
texas for a public agency while we had to take it all
the way to the supreme court be sure that it was
valid and we did and then the court held that that it
was valid as i set it up so uh we put in the retirement
system that when a man got to be 65, he had to retire.
And of course, at that time, I didn't think I'd ever
be 65. But when the time came, like everybody else,
I had to retire. And then when you retire, I've done
a few things for them when things have come up
involving something 20 or 30 years ago that nobody
else knew about. And then I've read, bills
introduced in the legislature and told them what
the effect would be. But other than that, I'm not
connected with them at all. I'm just on a retired
basis. The LCA was the first state agency to have a
retirement program? To have a retirement program
that was carried by an
insurance company. Ours is Prudential Insurance
Company and other companies, they get it by virtue
of bidding on the premium. And I believe ours was
the first one because I know that we had to go to the
Supreme Court to establish that we had a right to
take money and use it for our retirement system.
Now, the reason was, you see, we were taking money
that we collected as revenues. Now, if the
legislature wanted to appropriate money, they
could do that and set up a retirement system. But
you couldn't take revenue money until the LCRA
tested it out and found out that you could.
You said that you were involved with the LCRA since
1934. How much change have you seen? Obviously,
there's been tremendous change. Well, the
primary change, of course, is just in numbers. And
then also the change in the fact that back in 1934
everybody thought that the Colorado River would
always have enough water to take care of the
electric needs, but what no one expected in 1940
was that after the war was over you had such a
pent-up demand for equipment that would use
electric power that And then when the rural areas
came on, people started using from 5, 10, 15, 20,
and 50 times as much electricity, and nobody had
anticipated anything like that. And so the main
change has been in the way people use electricity
now from the way they used it back in 1930 and early
part of 1940. You didn't have electric
refrigeration. I mean, you had a little of it, but
not much. You didn't have air conditioning. You
didn't have television. You didn't have many,
many things. You didn't have electric dryers,
washers, washing machines. You didn't have on the
farms electric milking machines. You didn't have
so many things that have been brought on. The main
change is the fact that living has just been made
more comfortable by having lots of electric power
available.
Another great change is the use of the lakes for
recreation purposes. When they first came out,
the lakes were there, nobody much went up to the
lakes, but my goodness, after 1940, everybody had
to buy a boat, everybody had to have a cabin on the
lake, and has figured that at least a million
people a year use these lakes. They're free, and
it's brought about a tremendous impact on the
economy, but as well as the general welfare and the
happiness of the people, the fact that these lakes
are here, available for recreation. After the
war, recreation became more available to people,
and that's a great change from what it was in 1930
and 1940. Another change that during the war the
LCRA worked with all the private utilities
because of the need for more and more power and
particularly in Houston because they were being
loads were being dumped on them for building for
the war effort and as a result the Private
Utilities and LCRA worked up a very fine working
relationship. And they've worked together and
continue to work together. They have their lines
interconnected. They can help each other during
emergencies. They can help each other during
storms. They can help each other if they need help
because of unexpected loads, and that is what's
going on now in Texas. Everybody in the electric
business is helping each other for the benefit of
the state and the benefit of the people that are
being served. And that was not so in 1940 and 1930,
but primarily because it wasn't needed then. And
during the war, when we had so much demands and so
unexpected demands, it became necessary for all
of them to be interconnected and work together.
And they've been doing that now since 1915. It's
just worked out fine for everybody.
The private connector companies are turning more
and more to coal power, aren't they? Well,
everybody is, because the federal government
kept trying to make Texas give away their gas, so to
speak, kept the price so low. that everybody in the
north and east started buying gas, and then the gas
supply went down, and then the federal government
got scared and said that you couldn't build any
more gas plants, gas-fired plants, for
generating electricity. So you either had to go to
oil or coal. And when they started going to oil, the
price of oil went out the ceiling, and you had
the... the threat from the Near East and they
raised the price so coal became the...